Paper: Natural Language Processing with Pandas DataFrames (#637)
scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings: papers/fred_reiss/91_reiss.rst

:author: Frederick Reiss
:email: frreiss@us.ibm.com
:institution: IBM Research

:author: Bryan Cutler
:email: bjcutler@us.ibm.com
:institution: IBM

:author: Zachary Eichenberger
:email: zachary.eichen@gmail.com
:institution: University of Michigan
:institution: IBM Research

:bibliography: references

.. :video: https://youtu.be/dQw4w9WgXcQ

--------------------------------------------------
Natural Language Processing with Pandas DataFrames
--------------------------------------------------

.. class:: abstract

    Most areas of Python data science have standardized on using Pandas
    DataFrames for representing and manipulating structured data in memory.

>     Natural Language Processing, not so much.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Natural Language Processing (NLP), not so much.
```

Author: Added "(NLP)" as requested.

    
    We believe that Pandas has the potential to serve as a universal data
    structure for NLP data. DataFrames could make every phase of NLP easier,
    from creating new models, to evaluating their effectiveness, to building
    applications that integrate those models.  However, Pandas currently lacks
    important data types and operations for representing and manipulating
    crucial types of data in many of these NLP tasks.

    This paper describes *Text Extensions for Pandas*, a library of extensions
    to Pandas that make it possible to build end-to-end NLP applications while
    representing all of the applications' internal data with DataFrames.
    We leverage the extension points built into Pandas library to add new data
    types, and we provide important NLP-specfific operations over these data
    types and and integrations with popular NLP libraries and data formats.
    
.. class:: keywords

   natural language processing, Pandas, DataFrames

Background and Motivation
-------------------------

This paper describes our work on applying general purpose data analysis tools

> from the Python data science stack to natural language processing (NLP)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from the Python data science stack to Natural Language Processing (NLP)
```

Author: Changed case of "Natural Language Processing" as requested.

applications.  This work is motivated by our experiences working on NLP
products from IBM's *Watson* portfolio, including IBM Watson Natural Language
Understanding :cite:`nlu` and IBM Watson Discovery :cite:`discovery`.  

These products include many NLP components, such as state-of-the-art machine
learning models, rule engines for subject matter experts to write business
rules, and user interfaces for displaying model results.  However, the bulk of
the development work on these products involves not the core NLP components,

> but data manipulation tasks like converting between the output formats of
> different models; manipulating training data; analyzing the outputs of models
> for correctness; and serializing data for transfer across programming language

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but data manipulation tasks, such as converting between the output formats of
different models, manipulating training data, analyzing the outputs of models
for correctness, and serializing data for transfer across programming language
```

Author: Modified this paragraph as requested.

and machine boundaries.

> Although the raw input to our NLP algorithms is natural language text, most of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although the raw input to our NLP algorithms is text in natural language, most of
```

Author: Reworded to "text in a natural language"

the code in our NLP systems operates over machine data. Examples of this
machine data include:

* Relational tables of training data in formats like CoNLL-U :cite:`DBLP:journals/corr/abs-2004-10643`
* Model outputs formatted as tables for comparison against training data
* Arrays of dense tensors that represent BERT embeddings :cite:`devlin-etal-2019-bert`

> * Trees that represent dependency parses 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Trees that represent dependency parsers 
```

Author: Technically, "dependency parses" is the correct term here -- the plural form of "dependency parse", which is NLP jargon for "dependency-based parse tree". For better clarity here, I've replaced this bullet point with:
```
 * Graphs that represent dependency-based parse trees
```

* Relational tables that represent document structure

> This focus on mundane engineering tasks at the expense of core AI algorithms is

Reviewer 2: "mundane engineering tasks at the expense of core AI algorithms" - maybe make this language more neutral/objective?

Author: Reworded this clause to "This focus on data manipulation tasks instead of core AI algorithms..."

Reviewer 2: Thanks!

> not unique to IBM, or indeed to natural language processing :cite:`10.5555/2969442.2969519`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not unique to IBM, or indeed to NLP :cite:`10.5555/2969442.2969519`.
```

Author: Replaced "natural language processing" with "NLP" as requested.

However, NLP is unique in the quantity of redundant data structures and
low-level algorithms that different systems reimplement over and over again.
One can see this trend clearly in open source NLP libraries, where free access
to internal code also exposes the internal data structures.  Each of the major
NLP libraries implements its own custom data structures for basic NLP concepts. 

Consider the concept of a *span*: a region of a document, usually expressed as
a range of characters or tokens.  NLP systems use spans to represent the
locations of information they extract from text. This information includes
tokens, named entities, arguments to semantic role labeling predicates, and
many others.

Here is how some popular Python NLP libraries represent spans:

> * *spaCy* :cite:`spacy` has a Python class ``Span`` that represents a range of tokens. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *spaCy* :cite:`spacy` has a Python class  named ``Span`` that represents a range of tokens. The
```

Author: Added "named" as requested.

  locations of these tokens are stored inside the class ``Doc``. The  
  ``__getitem__`` method of ``Doc`` returns instances of the class ``Token``, which
  encodes the location of the token as a beginning character offset and a
  length in characters :cite:`spacy-api`.

> * *Stanza* :cite:`DBLP:journals/corr/abs-2003-07082` has a Python class
>   ``Span`` that represents a range of *characters*.  Information about the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Stanza* :cite:`DBLP:journals/corr/abs-2003-07082` has a Python class also named 
  ``Span`` that represents a range of *characters*.  Information about the
```

Author: Added "also named" as requested.

>   tokens that are contained within the character range are stored in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  tokens that are contained within the character range is stored in the
```

Author: Changed "are" to "is" as requested.

  ``tokens`` property of the ``Span`` as objects of type ``Token``

>   :cite:`stanza-src`.  These classes ``Span`` and ``Token`` are different from
>   the ``spaCy`` classes of the same names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  :cite:`stanza-src`.  These classes, ``Span`` and ``Token``, are different from
  the ``spaCy`` classes with the same names.
```

Author: Modified this sentence as requested.

> * ``nltk`` :cite:`Loper02nltk:the` models text as a Python list. The elements
>   of the list can be Python strings or tuples, depending on the stage of
>   processing. Spans over tokens are represented by slices of the list.
>   Character location information is not generally available

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``nltk`` :cite:`Loper02nltk:the` models text as a Python list. Depending on the stage of processing, the elements of the list can be Python strings or tuples. Spans over tokens are represented by slices of the list, and the information about character location is generally not available
```

Author: Reworded this paragraph as requested, but changed "...and the information about character location..." to "...and information about character locations...".

  :cite:`10.5555/1717171`.

> * ``transformers`` :cite:`wolf2020huggingfaces` does not generally model spans, 
>   instead leaving that aspect up to the user.  One exception is the library's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``transformers`` :cite:`wolf2020huggingfaces` does not generally model spans, 
  instead, it leaves that choice up to the user.  One exception to this is the library's
```

Author: Reworded to:
```
* ``transformers`` :cite:`wolf2020huggingfaces` does not generally model spans; 
  instead it leaves that choice up to the user.  One exception to this policy is the library's
  ``TokenClassificationPipeline`` class, [...]
```

> * ``transformers`` :cite:`wolf2020huggingfaces` does not generally model spans, 
>   instead leaving that aspect up to the user.  One exception is the library's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``transformers`` :cite:`wolf2020huggingfaces` does not generally model spans, 
  instead, it leaves that choice up to the user.  One exception to this is the library's
```

Author: Reworded to 
```
``transformers`` :cite:`wolf2020huggingfaces` does not generally model spans; 
  instead it leaves that choice up to the user. One exception to this policy is the library's
  ``TokenClassificationPipeline`` class, [...]
```

  ``TokenClassificationPipeline`` class, which has a method ``group_entities`` that
  returns a Python dictionary for each entity.  The fields ``start`` and
  ``end`` in this dictionary hold the span of the entity, measured in
  characters :cite:`transformers-api`.
* *TensorFlow Text* :cite:`tftext` represents lists
  of spans as either a pair of one-dimensional tensors (for tokenization) or as
  a single two-dimensional tensor (for span comparison operations).  The
  elements of the tensors can represent byte, character, or token offsets.
  Users need to track which type of offset is stored in a given tensor
  :cite:`tftext-api`.

All of these representations are incompatible with each other. Users who want

> to use two of these libraries together will need to write code to convert

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to use any two of these libraries together will need to write code to convert
```

Author: Added "any" as requested.

between their outputs.  Users are also left to invent their own algorithms for
even the most basic operations over spans, including serializing them, finding
their covered text, determining whether two spans overlap, and finding matches
between two sets of spans.

The redundancy that these libraries display at the level of individual spans is
pervasive across all the more complex structures that they extract from text.

> Users and library developers both spend considerable amounts of time reading

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both users and library developers spend considerable amounts of time reading
```

Author: Changed to "Both users and library developers spend..." as requested.

the documentation for these different data structures, writing code to convert
between them, and reimplementing basic operations over them.

An Alternative Approach
-----------------------

The Python data science community has developed effective tools for managing
and analyzing data in memory, chief among them being the DataFrame library
*Pandas* :cite:`jeff_reback_2021_4681666`.  Could we use these general-purpose
tools instead of continually reinventing data structures and algorithms for
basic NLP tasks?

We prototyped some use cases and quickly discovered that NLP-related data
involves domain-specific concepts; and some of these concepts are inconvenient
to express in Pandas.  For example, the *span* concept that we described in the
previous section is a crucial part of many applications.  The closest analog to
a span in Pandas' data model is the ``interval`` type, which represents an

> inteval using a pair of numbers.  When we prototyped some common NLP

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
interval using a pair of numbers.  When we prototyped some common NLP
```

Author: Fixed misspelling as requested.

applications using ``interval`` to represent spans, we needed additional code
and data structures to track the relationships between intervals and target
strings; as well as between spans and different tokenizations.  We also needed

> code to distinguish between intervals measured characters and in tokens. All of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
code to distinguish between intervals measured in characters and in tokens. All of
```

Author: Added missing "in" as requested.

this additional code negated much of the benefit of the general-purpose tool.

To reduce the amount of code that users would need to write, we started working

> on extensions to Pandas to better cover represent NLP-specific data and to

Reviewer 2: "cover represent"?

Reviewer: I think it is a typo, maybe it is meant to state "represent" only/

Author: Removed "cover". Text now reads "...to better represent NLP-specific data..."

support key operations over that data.  We call the library that we eventually
developed *Text Extensions for Pandas*.

Extending Pandas
++++++++++++++++

Text Extensions for Pandas includes three types of extensions:

* NLP-specific **data types (dtypes)** for Pandas DataFrames
* NLP-specific **operations** over these new data types
* **Integrations** between Pandas and common NLP libraries

Pandas includes APIs for library developers to add new data types to Pandas,
and we used these facilities to implement the NLP-specific data types in Text
Extensions for Pandas.

The core component of the Pandas extension type system is the *extension
array*. The Python class ``pandas.api.extensions.ExtensionArray`` defines key
operations for a columnar array object that backs a Pandas ``Series``
:cite:`pandas-extending`.  Classes
that extend ``ExtensionArray`` and implement a relatively short list of
required operations can serve as the backing stores for Pandas ``Series``

> objects while supporting   support nearly all the operations that Pandas

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
objects while supporting nearly all the operations that Pandas
```

Author: Oops! Fixed this repeated word.

built-in types support, including filtering, slicing, aggregation, and binary
I/O.

Indeed, many of the newer built-in types in Pandas, such as the ``interval`` 
and ``categorical``, are implemented as subclasses of ``ExtensionArray``.
Text Extensions for Pandas includes three different extension types based on
this API. The first two extension types are for spans with character- and
token-based offsets, respectively. The third extension type that we add
represents tensors.

Spans
-----

We implement character-based spans with a Python class called ``SpanArray``,
which derives from Pandas' ``ExtensionArray`` base class.  A ``SpanArray``
object represents a column of span data, and it stores this data internally

> using three Numpy :cite:`harris2020array` arrays, plus a shared reference to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using three NumPy :cite:`harris2020array` arrays, plus a shared reference to
```

Author: Changed "Numpy" to NumPy" across the entire document.

the underlying text.

> The three arrays that represent a column of spand data consist of arrays of

Reviewer 3: typo: spand

Author: Fixed

begin and end offsets (in characters), plus a third array of indices into a
dictionary of unique document texts. The ``SpanArray`` object also stores a
shared reference to a dictionary data structure that tracks unique document
texts.

The dictionary data structure is necessary because a Pandas series can contain
spans from multiple different documents.  Users need to be able to perform
operations over the containing DataFrames without creating many copies of the

> text of each document.  Dictionaries are append-only and are shared among

Reviewer 2: "Dictionaries are append-only" - I'm not sure I understand this statement. Could you please clarify its meaning and relevance to why a dictionary data structure is necessary?

Author: Replaced "dictionary" here with "table of unique strings" / "string table", which is hopefully a clearer descriptive term. Also expanded on these two paragraphs. Updated version:
```

The three arrays that represent a column of span data consist of arrays of
begin and end offsets (in characters), plus a third array of indices into a
table of unique target strings. The ``SpanArray`` object also stores a
shared reference to this table of strings.

The string table is necessary because a Pandas Series can contain spans over
many target strings. The spans in the Series might come from multiple
documents, or they may come from multiple fields of the same document.  Users
need to be able to perform operations over the containing DataFrames without
performing many string equality checks or creating many copies of the text of
each document.  Representing the target text of each span as an index into the
table allows us to quickly check whether two spans are over the same string.
The string table also allows the ``SpanArray`` class to track exactly which
unique strings the array's spans cover. Keeping track of this set of strings is
important for efficient serialization, as well as for efficiently appending one
``SpanArray`` to another. As an additional optimization, slicing and filtering
operations over a ``SpanArray`` do not modify the string table; a slice of an
array will share the same table as the original array.
```

Reviewer 2: Thanks!

SpanArray objects to facilitate zero-copy operations like filtering and slicing.

In addition to spans with character offsets, we also support spans whose begin
and end offsets are measured in tokens.  Token-based spans are a useful
construct because most machine learning models and rule engines for NLP operate

> over tokens, not characters.  Evaluation metrics for model result quality also

Reviewer 2: Maybe add pros/cons of token-based vs. character-based spans?

Author: Rewrote this paragraph as follows:
```
In addition to spans with character offsets, we also support spans whose begin
and end offsets are measured in tokens.  Most machine learning models and rule
engines for NLP do not operate over sequences of characters but over sequences
of *tokens* |---| ranges of characters that correspond to elements like words,
syllables, or punctuation marks.  Character-based spans are useful for
comparing, visualizing, and combining the outputs of multiple models, because
those models may use different tokenizations internally.  When analyzing the
inputs and outputs of a single model (or rule set, in the case of a rule-based
NLP system), tokens are a more appropriate unit for the begin and end offsets
of spans.  Representing spans with token offsets allows for operations like
computing token distances between spans and can prevent errors that could lead
to spans not starting or ending on a token boundary.  The loss functions used
to train most NLP models also tend to operate over tokens.
```

Reviewer 2: This is great, thank you.

tend to operate over tokens.  Representing spans with token offsets can
facilitate operations like computing token distances between spans and can
prevent errors that could lead to spans not starting or ending on a token
boundary.

There can be multiple different tokenizations of the same document, even within
a single application. When storing token-based span offsets, it is important to
retain information about which tokenization of which document each token offset
corresponds to.  The ``TokenSpanArray`` class represents each distinct
tokenization of a document with an instance of ``SpanArray`` containing the
locations of the tokens.  The representation of the token-based spans

> themselves consists of three Numpy arrays, holding begin and end offsets (in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
themselves consists of three NumPy arrays, holding begin and end offsets (in
```

Author: Changed "Numpy" to NumPy" across the entire document.

> tokens) and a pointer to the ``SpanArray`` containing the token offsts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
tokens) and a pointer to the ``SpanArray`` containing the token offsets.
```

Author: Fixed misspelling as requested.

Although it stores the locations of spans as token offsets, the
``TokenSpanArray`` class can generate character-based begin and offsets on
demand from its internal tables of token locations.  This facility allows
``TokenSpanArray`` to be used in any code that works over instances of
``SpanArray``. For example, code that detects pairs of overlapping spans can
easily work over arbitrary combinations of token- and character-based spans,
which is useful when merging the outputs of models that represent span offsets
differently. 

The internal structure of our ``SpanArray`` and ``TokenSpanArray`` extension
arrays allows for efficient vectorized implementations of common Pandas

> oeprations like slicing, filtering, and aggregation.  Slicing operations over a

Reviewer 3: typo: oeperations

Author: Fixed

``SpanArray`` produce a new ``SpanArray`` with views of the original

> ``SpanArray`` object's internal Numpy arrays, avoiding unneccessary copying of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``SpanArray`` object's internal NumPy arrays, avoiding unnecessary copying of
```

Author: Changed "Numpy" to NumPy" across the entire document.

Fixed misspelling of "unnecessary" as requested.

span data.

Tensors
-------

*Tensors* |---| dense n-dimensional arrays |---| are another common concept in

> modern natural language processing.  The deep learning models that drive much

Reviewer: ```suggestion
modern NLP.  The deep learning models that drive much
```

Author: Replaced "natural language processing" with "NLP" as requested.

of state-of-the-art NLP today take tensors as inputs and outputs and operate

> internally over other tensors.  Embeddings, a key part of many NLP algorithms,

Reviewer: A brief definition of (word) "embeddings" could be useful here for those who are not very familiar with NLP.

Author: Updated this sentence to:
```
Embeddings |---| data structures that encode
information about a block of text as a dense vector amenable to analysis with 
algorithms that expect dense input |---| are a key part of many NLP algorithms and can be efficiently represented with tensors.
```

can be efficiently represented with tensors.  Tensors are also useful for more
traditional types of NLP data, such as n-grams and one-hot-encoded feature
vectors.

> Our ``TensorArray`` extension array class represents a Pandas series where each
> element is a tensor.  Internally, we represent the entire series' data as a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our ``TensorArray`` extension array class represents a Pandas Series where each
element is a tensor.  Internally, we represent the entire Series' data as a
```

Author: Changed to "Series" (with a capital "S") as suggested. Also changed mentions of Pandas Series on lines 205 and 363 to match.

> single dense NumPy array The TensorArray class translates Pandas array

Reviewer 3: missing period after aray

Author: Fixed

> operations to vectorized operations over the underlying Numpy array.  These

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
operations to vectorized operations over the underlying NumPy array.  These
```

Author: Changed "Numpy" to NumPy" across the entire document.

vectorized operations are much more efficient than iterating over a list of

> tensors.

Reviewer 2: For readers from the diverse backgrounds represented at SciPy it may be helpful to add a few words or a reference on why, and perhaps by how much, they're more efficient.

Author: Changed this sentence to:
```
Because CPython :cite:`cpython`, the most common runtime for Python, uses an intepreter to run
Python code, these
vectorized operations are much more efficient than iterating over a list of
tensors.
```
where ``:cite:`cpython` `` is a reference to:
```

@software{cpython,
  author       = {Python core developers},
  title        = {CPython}
  year         = 2021,
  publisher    = {Python Software Foundation},
  url          = {https://github.com/python/cpython}
}
```

Since the individual data items in a ``TensorArray`` are actually slices of a

> larger Numpy array, our tensor data type integrates seamlessly with third

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
larger NumPy array, our tensor data type integrates seamlessly with third
```

Author: Changed "Numpy" to NumPy" across the entire document.

> larger Numpy array, lour tensor data type integrates seamlessly with third

Reviewer 3: typo: lour

Author: Fixed

> party libraries that accept Numpy arrays.  For example, Figure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
party libraries that accept NumPy arrays.  For example, Figure
```

Author: Changed "Numpy" to NumPy" across the entire document.

useful for cases where dataframes consist almost entirely of tensor data.  Our
``TensorArray`` extension type is a complementary alternative for applications
where the data is a mixture of tensors, spans, and built-in Pandas data types
with a wide variety of different schemas.  For example, figure :ref:`bert`
shows an example of a DataFrame that mixes spans, tensors, and Pandas
categorical types to store features of the tokens in a document.  For
applications that need this kind of mixture of data, our tensor type allows
users to leverage Pandas' collection of built-in operations and third-party
visualizations, while still operating efficiently over tensor-valued data
series.

.. figure:: figures/bert.png

   Slice of a DataFrame of information about tokens constructed with our
   library's integration with the ``transformers`` library for masked language
   models.  Each row of the DataFrame represents a token in the document. The
   leftmost column uses our span extension type to store the position of the
   token.  The rightmost column stores a BERT embedding at that token position.
   The columns in between hold token metadata that was created by aligning the

>    corpus's original tokenization with the language model's tokenization, then

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   corpus' original tokenization with the language model's tokenization, then
```

Author: Changed to "corpus'" as requested.

   propagating the corpus labels between pairs of aligned tokens.  The notebook
   in which this example appears (available at
   `<https://github.com/CODAIT/text-extensions-for-pandas/blob/master/notebooks/Model_Training_with_BERT.ipynb>`_)
   shows how to use this DataFrame as the input for training a named entity

>    recognition model with the ``sklearn`` libraray.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   recognition model with the ``sklearn`` library.
```

Author: Corrected misspelling as requested.

   :label:`bert`

Serialization
-------------

Many areas of modern NLP involve large collections of documents, and common NLP
operations can expand the size of this data by orders of magnitude.  Pandas
includes facilities for efficient serialization of Pandas data types using
Apache Arrow :cite:`arrow`. Text Extensions for Pandas uses this support to

> convert data in the library's extension types into in Arrow format for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
convert data from the library's extension types into Arrow format for
```

Author: Changed to "...data from the library's extension types into Arrow format..." as requested

efficient storage and transfer.

Efficient binary I/O can make reading and writing NLP corpora orders of
magnitude faster.  Figure :ref:`readtimes` compares the amount of time required
to read the training fold of the CoNLL-2003 corpus
:cite:`tjong-kim-sang-de-meulder-2003-introduction` from a local filesystem
when the corpus is stored in three different formats.  Reading the corpus with
Pandas and the Apache Parquet binary file format is 60 times faster than
reading the original CoNLL-format text file with ``nltk`` and 800 times faster

> than reading the corpus in DocBin format with spaCy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
than reading the corpus in DocBin format with SpaCy.
```

Author: It looks like "spaCy" is actually the correct spelling here; see my comment below at https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/pull/637#discussion_r661019102

.. figure:: figures/read_times.pdf

   Comparison of the amount of time required to read the training fold of the
   CoNLL-2003 named entity recognition corpus into memory, when the corpus is
   stored in three different file formats. Binary I/O with Pandas and the
   Apache Parquet file format is 2-3 orders of magnitude faster than the other
   file formats tested.
   :label:`readtimes`

Text Extensions for Pandas also supports reading files in the text-based

> formats known as CoNLL and CoNLL-U.  Many benchmark data sets for natural
> language processing are released in these formats. Text Extensions for Pandas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
formats known as CoNLL and CoNLL-U.  Many benchmark datasets for NLP are released in these formats. Text Extensions for Pandas
```

Author: Replaced "natural language processing" with "NLP" as requested.

can convert these files into DataFrames with one line per token, using our span

> extension type to store the location of token and the location of the token's
> containing sentence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extension type to store the location of a given token and the location of the tokens
containing a sentence.
```

Author: Reworded to "...store the location of a given token and the location of the sentence
that contains the token."

Spanner Algebra
---------------

In addition to representing span data, NLP applications need to filter,

> transform, and aggregate this data, often in ways that are unique to natural
> language processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
transform, and aggregate it, often, in ways that are unique to NLP.
```

Author: Changed "natural language processing" to "NLP" as requested.

The *document spanners* formalism :cite:`10.1145/2699442` extends the
relational algebra with additional operations to cover a wide gamut of
critical NLP operations.

Since it is an extension of the relational algebra, much of document spanners
can already be expressed with Pandas core operations.  We have implemented
several of the remaining parts of document spanners as operations over series
of type Span.

Specifically, we have NLP-specific *join* operations (sometimes referred to as
"merge") for identifying matching pairs of spans from two input sets, where the
spans in a matching pair have an overlap, containment, or adjacency
relationship.  These join operations are crucial for combining the results of
multiple NLP models, and they also play a role in rule-based business logic.
For example, a domain expert might need to find out matches of one model that
overlap with matches of a different model. If the output spans are in the

> "span" columns two DataFrames, ``model_1_out`` and ``model_2_out``, then the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"span" columns of two DataFrames, ``model_1_out`` and ``model_2_out``, then the
```

Author: Added "of" as requested.

user can find all such matching pairs by running the following line of code:

.. -----------------------------------------------------|
.. code-block:: python

    import text_extensions_for_pandas as tp

    # Find output spans of model 1 that contain output
    # spans of model 2.
    # This expression returns a DataFrame with two 
    # columns, span_1 and span_2, both of type span.
    span_pairs = tp.spanner.contain_join(
        model_1_out["span"], model_2_out["span"],
        "span_1", "span_2")

We include two implementations of the *extract* operator, which produces a set
of spans over the current document that satisfy a constraint.  Our current
implementations of *extract* support extracting the set of spans that match a
regular expression or a gazetteer (dictionary).

> We also include a version of the *consolidate* operator, which takes as input a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We include a version of the *consolidate* operator, which takes as input a
```

Author: Removed "also" as requested.

set of spans and removes overlap among the spans by applying a consolidation

> policy.  This operator is useful for business logic that combines that results

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
policy.  This operator is useful for business logic that combines the results
```

Author: Changed "that" to "the" as requested.

of multiple models and/or extraction rules as well as for resolving ambiguity
when a single model produces overlapping spans in its output.

Other Span Operations
+++++++++++++++++++++

> We also support span operations that are not part of the document spanners

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We support span operations that are not part of the document spanners
```

Author: Removed "also" as requested.

formalism but are important for key NLP tasks. These operations include:

* aligning spans based on one tokenization of the document to a different
  tokenization

> * *lemmatizing* spans |---| that is, converting the covered text of the span to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *lemmatizing* spans |---| that is, converting the text that the span covers to
```

Author: Changed to "converting the text that the span covers" as requested.

  a normalized form

* converting sequences of tokens tagged with inside-outside-beginning (IOB)
  tags :cite:`DBLP:journals/corr/cmp-lg-9505040` into spans of entities, and vice versa.

Jupyter Notebook Integration
----------------------------

Jupyter notebooks have built-in facilities for displaying Pandas DataFrames.
Our extensions to Pandas also work with these facilities.
If the last line of a notebook cell returns a DataFrame containing span and
tensor data, then Jupyter will display an HTML representation of the DataFrame,
including cells that contain our extension types. Figure :ref:`bert` shows how
a DataFrame containing a column of spans and a column of tensors renders as
HTML when shown in a Juypter notebook.

Other Python development tools, including Visual Studio Code, PyCharm, and
Google Colab, use extended versions of the Jupyter DataFrame display facilities
to show DataFrames in their own user interfaces. Our extension types also work
with these interfaces.

There is also an ecosystem of interactive libraries for exploring and
visualizing Pandas DataFrames.  These libraries also work with our extension

> types. Figure :ref:`dtale` shows an example of using Text Extensions for Pandas

Reviewer: Could you provide a list of the visualization tools you refer to ("these libraries") here?

Author: Added a list of some examples.

to display span data with the *D-Tale* interactive data analysis tool
:cite:`dtale`.

.. figure:: figures/dtale.png

   Displaying a DataFrame containing span data in the *D-Tale* interactive
   visualizer :cite:`dtale`. Our extension types for NLP work with third-party libraries 
   without requiring any changes to those libraries.
   :label:`dtale`

> Because our extension types for tensors use Numpy's `ndarray` type for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because our extension types for tensors use NumPy's `ndarray` type for
```

Author: Changed "Numpy" to NumPy" across the entire document.

individual cell values, these extension types work with many tools that accept

> Numpy arrays.  Figure :ref:`matplotlib` shows an example of storing time series

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NumPy arrays.  Figure :ref:`matplotlib` shows an example of storing time series
```

Author: Fixed this instance and changed every other instance of "Numpy" to "NumPy".

in the cells of a DataFrame and plotting those time series directly out of the
DataFrame using the graphics library ``matplotlib`` in a Jupyter notebook.

It is often useful to visualize spans in the context of the source text.  We
use Jupyter's built-in application programming interface (API) for HTML
rendering to facilitate this kind of visualization.  If the last expression in
a notebook cell returns a `SpanArray` or `TokenSpanArray` object, then Jupyter
will automatically display the spans in the context of the target text, as
shown in Figure :ref:`spandisplay`.

.. figure:: figures/spandisplay.png

>    Displaying the contents of a Pandas series of span data in the context of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Displaying the contents of a Pandas Series of span data in the context of
```

Author: Changed to "Series" as suggested.

   the target document, using the integration between Text Extensions for
   Pandas and Jupyter's APIs for HTML display.  The spans shown in this example
   represent all pronouns in sentences that contain the name "Arthur". We
   generated this set by cross-referencing the outputs of two models using Pandas operations.
   This notebook can be found at `<https://github.com/CODAIT/text-extensions-for-pandas/blob/master/notebooks/Analyze_Text.ipynb>`_.
   :label:`spandisplay`

Taken together with JupyterLab's ability to display multiple widgets and views
of the same notebook, these facilities allow users to visualize NLP data from
several perspectives at once, as shown in Figure :ref:`labeling`.

NLP Library Integrations
------------------------

> Text Extensions for Pandas provides facilities for transforming the outputs of
> several common NLP libraries into Pandas DataFrames, using our extensions to
> Pandas to represent NLP concepts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Text Extensions for Pandas provides facilities for transforming the outputs of
several common NLP libraries into Pandas DataFrames to represent NLP concepts.
```

Author: Removed "using our extensions to Pandas" as suggested.

spaCy
+++++

> *spaCy* :cite:`spacy` is a Python library that provides a suite of natural
> language processing models intended for production use.  Users of spaCy access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*spaCy* :cite:`spacy` is a Python library that provides a suite of NLP models intended for production use.  Users of spaCy access
```

Author: Changed to "NLP" as suggested.

> most of the library's functionality through spaCy *language models*, Python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
most of the library's functionality through SpaCy *language models*, Python
```

Author: It looks like "spaCy" is actually the correct spelling here; see my comment below at https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/pull/637#discussion_r661019102

objects that encapsulate a pipeline of rule-based and machine learning models.
A spaCy language model takes as input text in a particular natural language and
produces many analysis results from the text.

> Our spaCy integration converts the output of a spaCy language model into a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our SpaCy integration converts the output of a spaCy language model into a
```

Author: It looks like "spaCy" is actually the correct spelling here; see my comment below at https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/pull/637#discussion_r661019102

> A spaCy language model takes as input text in a particular natural language and
> produces many analysis results from the text.
> 
> Our spaCy integration converts the output of a spaCy language model into a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A SpaCy language model takes as input text in a particular natural language and
produces many analysis results from the text.

Our SpaCy integration converts the output of a SpaCy language model into a
```

Reviewer: I suggest rephrasing the following sentence to make it more clear: 

"A SpaCy language model takes as input text in a particular natural language and
produces many analysis results from the text."

In its current state, the phrase "many analysis results" is a little vague and could benefit from some specific references, such as "...produces results in various downstream NLP tasks.."

Author: Reworded this sentence to:
```
A spaCy language model takes natural language text as input and extracts  
features such as parts of speech, named entities, and dependency relationships
from the text. These features are useful in various downstream NLP tasks.
```

Regarding the spelling of the library: I did some additional research on this, and it looks like the correct spelling is with a lowercase "s". Explosion's trademark is for "spaCy" with a lowercase "s"; see https://trademark.trademarkia.com/ctm/spacy-015309701.htm. And the library's manual (https://spacy.io/usage) and Wikipedia page (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SpaCy) consistently use a lowercase "s". Is it ok to leave the library's name spelled with a lowercase "s"?

Reviewer: Ah! Sorry about that! It is, indeed, confusing as I have often seen it being used with capital S. But it seems like lowercase is appropriate, or even more accurate.

> DataFrame of token information. Figure shows an example of using this

Reviewer 2: Missing figure reference

Author: Added figure reference.

integration to process the first paragraph of the Wikipedia article for the
film *Monty Python and the Holy Grail*.

.. figure:: figures/spacy.png

>    Example of converting the output of a spaCy language model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Example of converting the output of a SpaCy language model.
```

Author: It looks like "spaCy" is actually the correct spelling here; see my comment below at https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/pull/637#discussion_r661019102

   Each row of the DataFrame holds information about a single token, including
   the span of the token and the span of the containing sentence. The code for
   this example is available at `<https://github.com/CODAIT/text-extensions-for-pandas/blob/master/notebooks/Integrate_NLP_Libraries.ipynb>`_.

> Converting from spaCy's internal representation to DataFrames allows users to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Converting from SpaCy's internal representation to DataFrames allows users to
```

Author: It looks like "spaCy" is actually the correct spelling here; see my comment below at https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/pull/637#discussion_r661019102

> use Pandas operations to analyze and transform the outputs of the language

Reviewer 2: "users to use" -> "usage of"

Author: Changed "users to use" to "usage of" as requested.

model.  For example, users can use Pandas' filtering, grouping, and aggregation
to count the number of nouns in each sentence:

.. -----------------------------------------------------|
.. code-block:: python

    # Filter tokens to those that are tagged as nouns
    nouns = tokens[tokens["pos"] == "NOUN"]

    # Compute the number of nouns in each sentence
    nouns.groupby("sentence").size() \
        .to_frame(name="num_nouns")

.. .. figure:: figures/nouns_wide.png
..   :figclass: h

> Or they could use our span-specific join operations and the Pandas `merge`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Or they could use our span-specific join operations and Pandas' `merge`
```

Author: Changed to "Pandas'" as suggested.

function to match all pronouns in the document with the person entities that
are in the same sentence:

.. code-block:: python

    import text_extensions_for_pandas as tp

    # Find person names
    entities = tp.io.conll.iob_to_spans(tokens)
    person_names = entities[
        entities["ent_type"] == "PERSON"]["span"]

    # Find all pronouns
    pronouns = tokens[tokens["tag"] == "PRP"] \
        [["span", "sentence"]]

    # Find all sentences
    sentences = tokens[["sentence"]].drop_duplicates() \
        ["sentence"]

    # Match names and pronouns in the same sentence
    pronoun_person_pairs = (
        pronouns.rename(columns={"span": "prounoun"})
            .merge(tp.spanner.contain_join(
                sentences, person_names, 
                "sentence", "person")))

> We also support using spaCy's `DisplaCy` visualization library to display

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also support using SpaCy's `DisplaCy` visualization library to display
```

Author: It looks like "spaCy" is actually the correct spelling here; see my comment below at https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/pull/637#discussion_r661019102

dependency parse trees stored in DataFrames.  Users can filter the output of
the language model using Pandas operations, then display the resulting subgraph
of the parse tree in a Jupyter notebook.  This display facility will work with

> any DataFrame that encodes a dependency parse as Pandas Series of token spans,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
any DataFrame that encodes a dependency parse as a Pandas Series of token spans,
```

Author: Added "a" as requested.

token IDs, and head IDs.

`transformers`
++++++++++++++

``transformers`` :cite:`wolf2020huggingfaces` is a library that provides
implementations of many state of the art masked language models such as BERT
:cite:`devlin-etal-2019-bert` and RoBERTa
:cite:`DBLP:journals/corr/abs-1907-11692`.  In addition to the language models
themselves, ``transformers`` includes dedicated tokenizers for these models,
most of which use subword tokenizers like *SentencePiece*
:cite:`kudo-richardson-2018-sentencepiece` to improve accuracy.

> Text Extensions for Pandas can transform two types of output from the

Reviewer 3: output -> outputs

Author: Fixed

``transformers`` library for masked language models into Pandas DataFrames.  We
can convert the output of the library's tokenizers into DataFrames of token
metadata, including spans marking the locations of each token.

Our tensor data type can also represent embeddings from the encoder stage of a
``transformers`` language model.  Since the language models in ``transformers``

> have a limited sequence lengh, we also include utility functions for dividing

Reviewer 3: typo: lengh

Author: Fixed

> large DataFrames of token information into token into fixed-size windows,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
large DataFrames of token information into fixed-size windows,
```

Author: Removed "token into" as requested.

generating embeddings for each window, and concatenating the resulting
embeddings to produce a new column for the original DataFrame.
Figure :ref:`bert` shows a DataFrame of token features that includes both a
span column with token location and a tensor column with embeddings at each
token position.

> IBM Watson Natural Languague Understanding

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
IBM Watson Natural Language Understanding
```

Author: Corrected this misspelling as requested. Also corrected a similar misspelling in the paragraph that follows.

++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Watson Natural Language Understanding :cite:`nlu` is an API that provides access to
prebuilt NLP models for common tasks across a wide variety of natural
languagues.  Users can use these APIs to process several thousands documents per
month for free, with paid tiers of the service available for higher data rates.

Our Pandas integration with Watson Natural Language Understanding can translate
the outputs of all of Watson Natural Language Understanding's information
extraction models into Pandas DataFrames. The supported models are:

* `syntax`, which performs syntax analysis tasks like tokenization,
  lemmatization, and part of speech tagging.
* `entities`, which identifies mentions of named entities such as persons,
  organizations, and locations.
* `keywords`, which identifies instances of a user-configurable set of keywords
  as well as information about the sentiment that the document expresses
  towards each keyword.

> * `semantic_roles`, which performs *semantic role labeling*, extracting
>   subject-verb-object triples that describe events that occurred in the text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `semantic_roles`, which performs *semantic role labeling*, extracting
  subject-verb-object triples that describe events which occur in the text.
```

Author: Changed to "which occur" as suggested

* `relations`, which identifies relationships betwen pairs of named entities.

Converting the outputs of these models to DataFrames makes building notebooks

> adn applications that analyze these outputs much easier.  For example, two

Reviewer 3: typo: adn

Author: Fixed

> and applications that analyze these outputs much easier.  For example, two

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and applications that analyze these outputs much easier.  For example, with two
```

Author: Added "with" as suggested.

lines of Python code, users can produce a DataFrame with information about all
person names that a document mentions:

.. -----------------------------------------------------|
.. code-block:: python

    import text_extensions_for_pandas as tp

    # The variable "response" holds the JSON output 
    # of the Natural Language Understanding service.
    # Convert to DataFrames and retrieve the DataFrame
    # of entity mentions.
    entities = tp.io.watson.nlu.parse_response(response) \
               ["entity_mentions"]

    # Filter entity mentions down to just mentions of
    # persons by name.
    persons = entities[entities["type"] == "Person"]
    
Figure :ref:`nluperson` shows the DataFrame that this code produces when

> run over an IBM press release.

Reviewer 2: Reference to the press release?

Author: Added the URL for the press release to the caption for the figure.

.. figure:: figures/nlu_person.png

   DataFrame of person names in a document created by converting the output of
   the Watson Natural Language Understanding's ``entities`` model to a
   DataFrame of entity mentions. We then used Pandas filtering operations to
   select the entity mentions of type "Person". The first column holds spans
   that tell where in the document each mention occurred.
   :label:`nluperson`

With a few additional steps, users can combine the results of multiple models
to produce sophisticated document analysis pipelines.  Figure :ref:`nlu` 
shows a DataFrame with the names of 301 executives extracted from 191 IBM press

> releases by cross-referencing the outputs Watson Natural Language

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
releases by cross-referencing the outputs of Watson Natural Language
```

Author: Added "of" as requested.

Understanding's ``entities`` and ``semantic_roles`` models.
All of the analysis steps that went into producing this result were done with
high-level operations from Pandas and Text Extensions for Pandas. Source code 
for this example is available on our blog post about this use case :cite:`marketintel`.

.. figure:: figures/nlu.png

   Excerpt from DataFrame containing the names of 301 executives extracted
   from 191 IBM press releases. To generate this table, we first converted the 
   outputs of Watson Natural Language Understanding's ``entities`` model, which 
   finds mentions of person names, and the product's ``semantic_roles`` model,
   which extracts information about the context in which words occur.
   Then we used a series of standard Pandas operations, plus operations from
   spanner algebra, to cross-reference the outputs of the two models. Code and
   a full explanation of this use case can be found in the article "Market
   Intelligence with Pandas and IBM Watson on the IBM Data and AI blog 
   :cite:`marketintel`.
   :label:`nlu`

IBM Watson Discovery
++++++++++++++++++++

IBM Watson Discovery :cite:`discovery` is a document management platform that

> uses intelligent search and text analytics to eliminate data silos and retrieve

Reviewer 2: "data silos" - maybe specify what this means as it is, I think, a business-specific term?

Author: Replaced "eliminate data silos" with "eliminate barriers to sharing data between teams"

information buried inside enterprise data.  One of the key features of the IBM
Watson Discovery product is *Table Understanding*, a document enrichment model
that identifies and parses human-readable tables of data in PDF and HTML
documents.

Text Extensions for Pandas can convert the output of Watson Discovery's Table
Understanding enrichment into Pandas DataFrames.  This facility allows users to
reconstruct the contents and layout of the original table as a DataFrame, which
is useful for debugging and analysis of these outputs. Figure
:ref:`tabletodf` shows an example DataFrame from this process next to the
original table in the source PDF document.

.. figure:: figures/table_to_df.png

   An example table from a PDF document in its original, human-readable form
   (left) and after using Text Extensions for Pandas to convert the output of
   Watson Discovery's Table Understanding enrichment into a Pandas DataFrame.
   :label:`tabletodf`

> Our conversion also produces a the "shredded" representation of the table as a

Reviewer 3: typo: a the

Author: Fixed.

Pandas' facilities for data cleaning, filtering, and aggregation are extremely
useful for turning raw information about extracted tables into clean,
deduplicated data suitable to insert into a database. Figure :ref:`revenue`
shows how, by cleaning and merging this shredded representation of a revenue
table across multiple IBM annual reports, one can construct a DataFrame with
ten years of revenue information broken down by geography.

.. figure:: figures/revenue_table.png

   DataFrame containing ten years of IBM revenue broken down by geography,
   obtained by loading ten years of IBM annual reports int IBM Watson
   Discovery; converting the outputs of Watson Discovery's Table Understanding
   enrichment to DataFrames; then cleaning and deduplicating the resulting data
   using Pandas. The code that produced this result can be found at `<https://github.com/CODAIT/text-extensions-for-pandas/blob/master/notebooks/Understand_Tables.ipynb>`_.
   :label:`revenue`

Usage in Natural Language Processing Research
---------------------------------------------

We are using Text Extensions for Pandas in ongoing research on semisupervised
identification of errors in NLP corpora.

> Pandas' data analysis facilities for provide a powerful substrate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pandas' data analysis facilities provide a powerful substrate
```

Author: Removed "for" as requested.

for cross-referencing and analyzing the outputs of NLP models in order to
pinpoint potentially-incorrect labels. 

One example of this type of application is work that we and several other
coauthors recently published on correcting errors in the highly-cited
CoNLL-2003 corpus for named entity recognition :cite:`reiss-etal-2020-identifying`.
We identified over 1300 errors in the corpus and published a corrected version
of the corpus. We also revisited recent results in named entity recognition
using the corrected corpus.

> Nearly every step of our analyis used Text Extensions for Pandas.  We started

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nearly every step of our analysis used Text Extensions for Pandas.  We started
```

Author: Fixed spelling error as requested.

by using our library's input format support to read the model results from the

> 16 teams in the data set's original 2003 competition.  Then we used Text

Reviewer: ```suggestion
16 teams in the dataset's original 2003 competition.  Then we used Text
```

Author: Changed to "dataset" as suggested. Also changed a second instance of "data set" on line 343 to "dataset"

> Extensions for Pandas to pivot convert these outputs from labeled tokens to

Reviewer 2: "pivot convert"?

Author: Oops, two verbs where one will do :)  Removed "pivot" from this sentence.

DataFrames of <span, label> pairs, with one such pair for each entity mention.
Using spanner algebra, we cross-referenced these entity mentions with the
entity mentions to find cases where there was strong agreement among the
teams' models coupled with *disagreement* with the corpus labels.  A large
fraction of these cases involved incorrect corpus labels. 

Since we did not have model outputs for the training fold of the corpus, we
used our library's integration with the ``transformers`` library to retokenize
this part of the corpus with the BERT tokenizer. Then we used spanner algebra
to match the corpus's token labels with the corresponding subword tokens from

> the BERT tokenizer. We again used our library's integration with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the BERT tokenizer. We, again, used our library's integration with
```

Author: Edited this to "Again, we used..."

``transformers`` to add a column to our DataFrame of tokens containing BERT

> embeddings at each token position as tensors.  Then we used scikit-learn to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
embeddings at each token position as tensors.  Then we used `scikit-learn` to
```

Please add citation: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/about.html#citing-scikit-learn

Author: Added a citation to scikit-learn and changed font to fixed-width.

   evaluation. All of these views are driven off of Pandas DataFrames of <span,
   entity type> pairs. The bottom pane is where human evaluators flag
   incorrectly labeled entities.  This Jupyter notebook is part of an in-depth
   tutorial available at
   `<https://github.com/CODAIT/text-extensions-for-pandas/tree/master/tutorials/corpus>`_.
   :label:`labeling`

The code that we used in this paper is available as a collection of Jupyter
notebooks at
`<https://github.com/CODAIT/text-extensions-for-pandas/tree/master/tutorials/corpus>`_.
We are currently working to extend the techniques we
developed in order to cover a wider variety of token classification corpora and
to incorporate several of the techniques used in our paper into the Text
Extensions for Pandas library :cite:`dash-la`.

.. Note we have a paper to appear in DaSH-LA on what the previous paragraph
   describes. Potentially update a citation here once that paper is available?

Conclusion
----------

This paper has introduced our library, Text Extensions for Pandas. Text
Extensions for Pandas provides a collection of extension data types,
NLP-specific operations, and NLP library integrations that turn Pandas

> DataFrams into a universal data structure for managing the machine data that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DataFrames into a universal data structure for managing the machine data that
```

Author: Corrected misspelling as requested.
